README.md, before:

# bacnet_parse

[![LICENSE](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MPL_2.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Crates.io Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/bacnet_parse.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/bacnet_parse)

## bacnet_parse is a #![no_std] library to parse BACnet bytes into read-only data structures

Currently handles:
* MS/TP
* BVLL (basic - just enough to get NPDU)
* NPDU

Targeting support for:
* NSDU ([NLM/RPDU](http://www.bacnetwiki.com/wiki/index.php?title=Network_Layer_Message_Type), APDU)

To assist parsing BACnet IP or BACnet Ethernet, two recommended libraries are:
* [pnet](https://crates.io/crates/pnet)
* [etherparse](https://crates.io/crates/etherparse)

### Examples

BVLC example

```rust
let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x81, 0x0a, 0x00, 0x1b, // BVLC
    0x01, 0x20, 0x00, 0x0d, 0x01, 0x3d, 0xff, // NPDU
    0x30, 0xc9, 0x0c, 0x0c, 0x02, 0x00, 0x00, 0x6f, 0x19, 0x4c, 0x29, 0x00, 0x3e, 0x21,
    0x21, 0x3f, // APDU
];

let bvlc = parse_bvlc(&bytes)?;

assert_eq!(bvlc.bvlc_function(), BVLCFunction::UnicastNPDU);

let npdu = bvlc.npdu().as_ref().expect("npdu");

assert_eq!(npdu.ncpi_control(), 0x20);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_apdu(), true);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_src_spec_present(), false);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_dst_spec_present(), true);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_expecting_reply(), false);
assert_eq!(npdu.src().is_none(), true);

let dst_hopcount = npdu.dst_hopcount().as_ref().expect("dst_hopcount");

assert_eq!(dst_hopcount.hopcount(), 255);

let dst = dst_hopcount.dst();

assert_eq!(dst.net(), 13);
assert_eq!(dst.addr().len(), 1);
assert_eq!(dst.addr()[0], 61);
```

MSTP example
```rust
let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x55, 0xff, 0x05, 0x0c, 0x7f, 0x00, 0x1f, 0x35, 0x01, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x01, 0x06, 0xc0,
    0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0, 0x02, 0x01, 0x6a, 0x0f, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x80, 0x00, 0x0a,
    0x19, 0x55, 0x3e, 0x44, 0x41, 0xe8, 0x00, 0x01, 0x3f, 0x49, 0x09, 0xc9, 0x6f,
];

let frame = parse_mstp(bytes)?;

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().header();
assert_eq!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x35);

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().data();
assert_eq!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x6fc9);

assert_eq!(frame.frame_type(), MSTPFrameType::BACnetDataExpectingReply);
let npdu = frame.npdu().as_ref().expect("npdu");

let src = npdu.src().as_ref().expect("src");
assert_eq!(src.net(), 1);
assert_eq!(src.addr().len(), 6);
let addr_cmp: &[u8] = &[0xc0, 0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0];
assert_eq!(src.addr(), addr_cmp);
assert_eq!(npdu.dst_hopcount().is_none(), true);

let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x55, 0xff, 0x05, 0x0c, 0x7f, 0x00, 0x1f, 0x34, 0x01, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x01, 0x06, 0xc0,
    0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0, 0x02, 0x01, 0x6a, 0x0f, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x80, 0x00, 0x0a,
    0x19, 0x55, 0x3e, 0x44, 0x41, 0xe8, 0x00, 0x01, 0x3f, 0x49, 0x09, 0xc9, 0x6e,
];

let frame = parse_mstp(bytes)?;

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().header();
assert_ne!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x34);

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().data();
assert_ne!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x6ec9);
```

### Why not use [nom](https://crates.io/crates/nom)?

nom is a great library, but I don't think it's well suited to application layer data with weird
formats like BACnet. For example, the weirdness of the NPDU layout where the hop count value's
existence is tied to but may or may not be contiguous with the destination port/address.

Avoiding the use of nom may also lower the barrier to entry for contribution so that a
potential contributor does not also need to learn the nom library.

These are opinions, so if you disagree and would like to use nom for parsing, feel free to make
a pull request that includes nom.

License: MPL-2.0

Commit message:

Added section for how to use the library

README.md, after:

# bacnet_parse

[![LICENSE](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MPL_2.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Crates.io Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/bacnet_parse.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/bacnet_parse)

## bacnet_parse is a #![no_std] library to parse BACnet bytes into read-only data structures

Currently handles:
* MS/TP
* BVLL (basic - just enough to get NPDU)
* NPDU

Targeting support for:
* NSDU ([NLM/RPDU](http://www.bacnetwiki.com/wiki/index.php?title=Network_Layer_Message_Type), APDU)

To assist parsing BACnet IP or BACnet Ethernet, two recommended libraries are:
* [pnet](https://crates.io/crates/pnet)
* [etherparse](https://crates.io/crates/etherparse)

### How to use this library

For BACnet ethernet and BACnet IP, first identify your BACnet application layer bytes then call
to `parse_bvlc(bytes)` and go from there.

For MSTP, call either `parse_mstp(bytes)` or `parse_mstp_skip_crc_compute(bytes)`.

Not yet implemented below:

In order to parse the RPDU or APDU, first check which one you have with `npdu.is_apdu()` then
call either `parse_apdu(npdu.payload())` or `parse_rpdu(npdu.payload())`.

### Examples

BVLC example

```rust
let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x81, 0x0a, 0x00, 0x1b, // BVLC
    0x01, 0x20, 0x00, 0x0d, 0x01, 0x3d, 0xff, // NPDU
    0x30, 0xc9, 0x0c, 0x0c, 0x02, 0x00, 0x00, 0x6f, 0x19, 0x4c, 0x29, 0x00, 0x3e, 0x21,
    0x21, 0x3f, // APDU
];

let bvlc = parse_bvlc(&bytes)?;

assert_eq!(bvlc.bvlc_function(), BVLCFunction::UnicastNPDU);

let npdu = bvlc.npdu().as_ref().expect("npdu");

assert_eq!(npdu.ncpi_control(), 0x20);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_apdu(), true);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_src_spec_present(), false);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_dst_spec_present(), true);
assert_eq!(npdu.is_expecting_reply(), false);
assert_eq!(npdu.src().is_none(), true);

let dst_hopcount = npdu.dst_hopcount().as_ref().expect("dst_hopcount");

assert_eq!(dst_hopcount.hopcount(), 255);

let dst = dst_hopcount.dst();

assert_eq!(dst.net(), 13);
assert_eq!(dst.addr().len(), 1);
assert_eq!(dst.addr()[0], 61);
```

MSTP example
```rust
let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x55, 0xff, 0x05, 0x0c, 0x7f, 0x00, 0x1f, 0x35, 0x01, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x01, 0x06, 0xc0,
    0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0, 0x02, 0x01, 0x6a, 0x0f, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x80, 0x00, 0x0a,
    0x19, 0x55, 0x3e, 0x44, 0x41, 0xe8, 0x00, 0x01, 0x3f, 0x49, 0x09, 0xc9, 0x6f,
];

let frame = parse_mstp(bytes)?;

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().header();
assert_eq!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x35);

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().data();
assert_eq!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x6fc9);

assert_eq!(frame.frame_type(), MSTPFrameType::BACnetDataExpectingReply);
let npdu = frame.npdu().as_ref().expect("npdu");

let src = npdu.src().as_ref().expect("src");
assert_eq!(src.net(), 1);
assert_eq!(src.addr().len(), 6);
let addr_cmp: &[u8] = &[0xc0, 0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0];
assert_eq!(src.addr(), addr_cmp);
assert_eq!(npdu.dst_hopcount().is_none(), true);

let bytes: &[u8] = &[
    0x55, 0xff, 0x05, 0x0c, 0x7f, 0x00, 0x1f, 0x34, 0x01, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x01, 0x06, 0xc0,
    0xa8, 0x01, 0x12, 0xba, 0xc0, 0x02, 0x01, 0x6a, 0x0f, 0x0c, 0x00, 0x80, 0x00, 0x0a,
    0x19, 0x55, 0x3e, 0x44, 0x41, 0xe8, 0x00, 0x01, 0x3f, 0x49, 0x09, 0xc9, 0x6e,
];

let frame = parse_mstp(bytes)?;

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().header();
assert_ne!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x34);

let (actual, expected) = frame.crcs().data();
assert_ne!(actual, expected);
assert_eq!(actual, 0x6ec9);
```

### Why not use [nom](https://crates.io/crates/nom)?

nom is a great library, but I don't think it's well suited to application layer data with weird
formats like BACnet. For example, the weirdness of the NPDU layout where the hop count value's
existence is tied to but may or may not be contiguous with the destination port/address.

Avoiding the use of nom may also lower the barrier to entry for contribution so that a
potential contributor does not also need to learn the nom library.

These are opinions, so if you disagree and would like to use nom for parsing, feel free to make
a pull request that includes nom.

License: MPL-2.0
